### ms-01-03 -+- Highlights

 * Page 7: "The purpose of this manual is to present a sampling methodology that can generate estimates of health facilities and their characteristics, and, when desired, tie the characteristics of the sampled facilities to those of the serviced population in a meaningful way.  Two sampling designs are proposed and recommended in this manual.  The first is for a stand-alone health facility survey (chapter 4), and the second (chapter 5) is for a health facility survey linked to a household survey. The design for the latter requires adopting the same sample areas used to generate household data collected in surveys such as Demographic and Health Surveys or the Reproductive Health Surveys.1 Both recommended sampling designs provide unbiased estimates of facilities and their characteristics; the linked sampling design, however, provides additional information on the health service environment for resident populations in the household survey sample areas."

 * Page 8: "Health facility assessments or surveys are generally conducted for one of two purposes and often both – monitoring the distribution and use of public health resources and evaluating the impact of public health programs. A facility survey can be used to monitor program performance in the provision of services related to family planning, child health, maternal health and sexually transmitted infections (STI), including HIV and AIDS.  This type of monitoring might be done in relation to a specific program or intervention that is being implemented, or it might refer to general-purpose monitoring of health services for an entire country or sub-region in the absence of a particular action program. General-purpose or global monitoring entails collecting and analyzing data routinely on various inputs and outputs of service sites, such as the percentage of health centers in a country with stock-outs (lacking vaccines, medical supplies, or contraceptive commodities) or client caseloads."

 * Page 9: "It is important to mention that information regarding the presence and characteristics of health facilities may be routinely collected in a Health Information System (HIS), which is usually operated out of a statistical unit within a Health Ministry or Department.  Generally the coverage of an HIS is determined by the sponsoring agency, such as including all public health facilities covered by the Ministry of Health, or all health service sites receiving some public funding, or all health providers participating in a managed care organization.  In some cases, private or quasi-private health facilities may be participating units in an HIS.  Assessing the availability, distribution and quality of health services in a country can be accomplished through an HIS if all types of health service sites participate in the reporting.  The HIS may require all or a sample of sites to report.  Regardless, where health services are provided through a diverse mix of public and private sites and HIS coverage is limited to a subset of these sites, it is useful to conduct periodic surveys of health service sites to update and verify the HIS-based profile."

 * Page 10: "In considering the sampling needs for facility surveys, it is useful to examine the analytical strategies employed for program evaluation.  The effects of interest may be systemic, that is, evaluating and attributing change in health service delivery systems to program improvements, such as for clinical training, commodities logistics management, or infection prevention procedures.  Likewise, the effects of interest may be client- or population-based, such as increasing client satisfaction with services or reducing unwanted pregnancies or disease morbidity and mortality.  Illustrative hypotheses of systemic outcomes investigated in program evaluation are"

 * Page 10: "Perhaps the easiest way to envision the units that would need to be considered as part of a sample design is to identify first what population is of interest – health facilities, staff at health facilities, pharmacies or drug retailers, mobile or community-based staff, current or past clients, or populations at risk, whether these are delimited by age, gender or place of residence.  This determination helps a sampling statistician develop a protocol that will produce estimates with a minimum of bias and a maximum of precision."

 * Page 11: "While the focus of this manual is sampling for facility surveys, the latter cannot be considered apart from the overall survey methodology that is needed to collect data on facility variables and related measures.  In turn, the survey methods depend on the measurement objectives, or, in short, what it is we wish to find out.  Hence the first step (and requirement) in this or any other survey under-taking is a clear and unambiguous specification of those measurement objectives. In statistical parlance they are simply the estimates we want.  For a facility survey, they may best be seen by considering the substantive items of inquiry in a generic form, as detailed in the subsection immediately following.  The survey methods that are necessary to collect the various measures provide a second way of categorizing the particular indicators of interest and these are described in a later subsection, entitled, ``Indicators and Collection Method.''"

 * Page 12: "While other types of information may be needed in the overall research design for an evaluation of program impact, they are not all collected in the facility survey.  Population data come from household surveys such as the aforementioned DHS or RHS.  Examples of variables or indicators from household surveys are the contraceptive prevalence rate; percentage of women ages 20-24 who have had a first birth before the age of 20; the percentage of infants under 6 months of age exclusively breastfed; proportion of births spaced 24 months or longer; percentage of men or women ages 15-49 who report the use of a condom during the most recent act of sexual intercourse; and the proportion of mothers whose last birth was attended by a trained professional."

